---
id: 2018-07-18-graphql
author: matthew
title: 'Notes on GraphQL'
draft: false
public: true
created: '2018-07-18T17:05:00-05:00'
updated: '2018-07-18T17:05:00-05:00'
tags:
    - php
    - rest
    - graphql
---

The last week has been my first foray into GraphQL, using the [GitHub GraphQL
API](https://developer.github.com/v4/) endpoints. I now have Opinions<sup>TM</sup>.

The promise is fantastic: query for everything you need, but nothing more. Get
it all in one go.

But the reality is somewhat... different.

<!--- EXTENDED -->

What I found was that you end up with a lot of garbage data structures that you
then, on the client side, need to decipher and massage, unpacking edges, nodes,
and whatnot. I ended up having to do almost a dozen `array_column`, `array_map`,
and `array_reduce` operations on the returned data to get a structure I can
actually use.

The final data I needed looked like this:

```json
[
  {
    "name": "zendframework/zend-expressive",
    "tags": [
      {
        "name": "3.0.2",
        "date": "2018-04-10"
      }
    ]
  }
]
```

To fetch it, I needed a query like the following:

```json
query showOrganizationInfo(
  $organization:String!
  $cursor:String!
) {
  organization(login:$organization) {
    repositories(first: 100, after: $cursor) {
      pageInfo {
        startCursor
        hasNextPage
        endCursor
      }
      nodes {
        nameWithOwner
        tags:refs(refPrefix: "refs/tags/", first: 100, orderBy:{field:TAG_COMMIT_DATE, direction:DESC}) {
          edges {
            tag: node {
              name
              target {
                ... on Commit {
                  pushedDate
                }
                ... on Tag {
                  tagger {
                    date
                  }
                }
              }
            }
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

Which gave me data like the following:

```json
{
  "data": {
    "organization": {
      "repositories: {
        "pageInfo": {
          "startCursor": "...",
          "hasNextPage": true,
          "endCursor": "..."
        },
        "nodes": [
          {
            "nameWithOwner": "zendframework/zend-expressive",
            "tags": {
              "edges": [
                "tag": {
                  "name": "3.0.2",
                  "target": {
                    "tagger": {
                      "date": "2018-04-10"
                    }
                  }
                }
              ]
            }
          }
        ]
      }
    }
  }
}
```

How did I discover how to create the query? I'd like to say it was by reading
the docs. I really would. But these gave me almost zero useful examples,
particularly when it came to pagination, ordering results sets, or what those
various "nodes" and "edges" bits were, or why they were necessary. (I eventually
found the information, but it's still rather opaque as an end-user.)

Additionally, see that `pageInfo` bit? This brings me to my next point: pagination sucks,
particularly if it's not at the top-level. You can only fetch 100 items at a
time from any given node in the GitHub GraphQL API, which means pagination. And
I have yet to find a client that will detect pagination data in results and
auto-follow them. Additionally, the "after" property had to be something
valid... but there were no examples of what a valid value would be. I had to
resort to StackOverflow to find an example, and I still don't understand why it
works.

> I get why clients cannot unfurl pagination, as pagination data could appear
> _anywhere_ in the query. However, it hit me hard, as I thought I had a
> complete set of data, only to discover around half of it was missing once I
> finally got the processing correct.

If any items further down the tree _also_ require pagination, you're in for some
real headaches, as you then have to fetch paginated sets depth-first.

So, while GraphQL promises fewer round trips and exactly the data you need, my
experience so far is:

- I end up having to be very careful about structuring my queries, paying huge
  attention to pagination potential, and often sending multiple queries ANYWAYS.
  A well-documented REST API is often far easier to understand and work with
  immediately.

- I end up doing MORE work client-side to make the data I receive back USEFUL.
  This is because the payload structure is based on the query structure and the
  various permutations you need in order to get at the data you need. Again, a
  REST API usually has a single, well-documented payload, making consumption far
  easier.

I'm sure I'm probably mis-using GraphQL, or missing a number of features to make
this stuff easier, but so far, I'm left wishing I could just have a number of
useful REST endpoints that I can hit consistently in order to aggregate the data
I need.

> Before anybody suggests it, yes, I am _very_ aware that GitHub also offers a
> REST API, and the v3 API has endpoints for most of what I needed. However, I
> had to rely on tags, not releases, as not all of our tags have associated
> releases. However, the data returned for tags does not include the commit
> date; for that, you need to fetch the associated commit, and then the date may
> be under either the `author` or the `committer`. This approach would have
> meant literally thousands of calls to get the data I need, which would have
> had me hitting rate limits, and potentially taking hours to complete.
>
> My point: perhaps instead of GraphQL, aggregating a bit more data in REST
> resources (e.g., including commit data with tags), or providing endpoints that
> allow merging specific resource types could have solved the problem easily.
> This is where having a developer relations team that finds out what data
> _consumers_ are needing comes in handy, instead of simply mandating _graphql
> all the things_ to allow infinite flexibility (and the frustrations of such
> flexibility, both for the API developer and consumer).
