---
id: 90-Liam-Patrick-OPhinney
author: matthew
title: 'Liam Patrick O''Phinney'
draft: false
public: false
created: '2005-08-21T22:33:11-04:00'
updated: '2008-07-25T17:48:07-04:00'
tags:
    - family
---
Liam Patrick O'Phinney was born Saturday, 20 August 2005, at around 9:40am,
weighing 3 pounds, 7 oz! Read on for more details — the story behind the birth
is an unusual and exciting ride! However, if you're squeamish, there's some
pretty… graphic… detail below, so be warned.

<!--- EXTENDED -->

Jen started having contractions Thursday night that woke her, but they were
infrequent, and only a few followed during the day Friday. We spent a quiet
evening in with our friend Erin, having some Chinese food and watching a Scooby
Doo movie with Maeve.

Shortly after midnight, Jen started having contractions again, and over the
course of the early morning, they continued, getting more frequent and intense.
Finally, around 5am, she was able to sleep… only to be awoken by them again at
6:30am.

By 7:30, they were 7 minutes apart, and a call to the doctor told us to call
again when they were 3–5 minutes apart. Which was about an hour later. By this
time, Jen was in some serious discomfort, and did not want to leave the bed. I
got bags packed, made arrangements for Maeve (thanks again, Brendan and
Ursula!), and was ready when Erin arrived to accompany us to the hospital.

As we were dropping off Maeve, Jen told me to be quick, and evidently the
thirty seconds or so I spent telling Ursula how to reach us and where we were
going were too long, as Jen honked the horn. I ran to the car, and we rushed
off to the hospital over a series of extremely bumpy roads that had Jen in
absolute agony.

I dropped Jen and Erin at the hospital doors, parked the car, grabbed the bag,
and ran in. Jen was just finishing registration, and I helped sign paperwork
while massaging Jen's head. She was having some very severe contractions that
reminded me of the last part of her labor with Maeve, and I was getting
worried. The registration desk person must have been, too, as she told us to
take our time, but was looking at Jen nervously.

We started walking towards the elevators, but Jen asked if she could stop at
the restroom to pee. She started heading in, and Erin asked if I was going in.
I asked her to, in case anyone else was in the restroom. A minute later, she
yelled out that Jen had decided she wanted a wheelchair.

I ran to grab one, and poked my head in the restroom door to tell them I was
ready. I was greeted with shouts of, "She's ha[ving] a baby — get a doctor!"

I ran to the info desk, yelling that my wife was having a baby in the bathroom,
and to get help. Unfortunately, the info desk doesn't have a phone, and is
personned by volunteer staff, so the elderly lady behind the counter had to run
around the counter to join me and go as fast as we could to the registration
desks, where she belted out, "This gentleman's wife is having a baby in the
bathroom and we need help!" The registration person we saw immediately stood up
and picked up the phone, turned to the man next to her and ordered him to get a
doctor, asked me where Jen was, and said something into the phone. I asked if I
could go, and she told me to run.

I sprinted past several people entering the lobby, and probably had them
wondering why the hell a man was in such a hurry to get to the women's
bathroom.

Once inside, I was greeted by a very peculiar tableau. Jen was bent forward,
butt over the middle stall, and Erin was bent over her, both hands around Jen's
butt. I asked what was happening, and if I could help. Erin answered that she
was holding the baby. My immediate thought was that the baby had started coming
out, and that the head was part way out. I asked her to repeat it, but still
didn't understand. A moment later, a doctor came in, asking what was going on.
Erin repeated her statement, and he asked her to step back so he could see.

"No, you don't understand! I've got the baby in my hands! It's already out!"

Evidently, Jen, once seated, no longer needed to pee. Instead, she thought she
needed to defecate. And, in doing so, in a push and a half, delivered the baby
*and* placenta intact into the toilet. When she saw the alien-looking thing in
the toilet, she realized she'd given birth and yelled to Erin — who, like me,
didn't understand until she saw it — but she had the presence to scoop him out
of the toilet.

She handed the baby to the doctor, and this was the first I saw of our son. He
was still in his amniotic sac, and my first thought was, "Oh my god — it's a
stillborn." I started shaking, but watched on as the doctor then tore open the
amniotic sac. I asked if I could help, and his only answer was, "Go comfort
your wife."

The stall was a crowded place, though, and full of blood, and Jen held her
hands palm out to me, telling be stay back. Erin went to watch the doctor, and
I babbled to Jen, asking her how she was doing, telling her she was fine, the
baby was fine. A moment later, I looked back, and saw Liam's legs kicking and
his chest rising and falling… and a few cries followed that. I turned to Jen
and told her he was crying, and kicking, and he was going to be okay.

Moments later, the place swarmed with personnel from the delivery rooms —
easily 10 people. A pediatrician took over for the doctor who had initially
come in (who, as it turned out, is one of the top pediatric surgeons in
Vermont, and had just been passing by when the registration person we'd seen
earlier snagged him and brought him in), and we got to see our son — who looked
like he was doing fine.

And fine he is! He will be staying in the hospital for a while; they estimate
we'll be able to bring him home on the 30th, but it depends on how he starts
eating. At the time I write this, he is in completely stable condition. He is
having a short antibiotic treatment (which ends tomorrow), and phototreatment
(to treat jaundice, which often happens in premature births). And today, he
tried eating several times — which is a very positive sign that he will be
doing just fine in the days to come. Additionally, he responds to all our
voices — he actually turned towards Maeve this afternoon as she started singing
the alphabet song, and watched her for a minute or so. (This was perhaps the
most touching thing I've seen in my life.)

I've got a few pictures up at [the family website](http://weierophinney.net/gallery/),
and will get more up soon and as they're taken.

Happy Birthday, Liam! We've been waiting for you a long time, and we're glad to
have you with us!
